# Sleep-deprivation-spatial-transcriptomic
Spatial transcriptomics reveals unique gene expression changes in different brain regions after sleep deprivation

Highlights
•	The transcriptional signature of each spot recapitulates the anatomy of the mouse brain
•	Sleep deprivation induces specific transcriptomic changes unique to each brain region and cortical layers
•	The hypothalamus is the brain region the most affected after sleep deprivation
•	The neocortex is the brain region the most induced transcriptionally after sleep deprivation
Sleep deprivation has far-reaching consequences on behavior and bodily function. These alterations in function are rooted in changes in different brain regions that underlie these behaviors, where the consequences of sleep deprivation can be detected at multiple levels, including changes in gene expression. Some regions, like the hippocampus and cortex, have been extensively studied because of their vulnerability to sleep loss and for the importance of these regions to functions like memory. The large number of genes affected by sleep deprivation reflects the complexity of the response triggered by sleep, including cognitive deficits, general impairment of protein translation, metabolic imbalance, and thermal deregulation. However, much less is known about the location and intensity of those changes across the whole brain. Here we used the 10x Genomics Visium Gene Expression Solution platform to define the spatial topography of gene expression in sections of whole brain tissue from mice after sleep deprivation. By performing differential gene expression analysis, we showed spatially defined expression changes in each brain region and were able to reveal gene expression patterns and molecular pathways that were unique to each of these regions. The hippocampal region and hypothalamus were the most sensitive aeras in terms of significant reduction of gene expression with many molecular functions enriched for transmembrane transporter activity. The thalamus had a more balanced number of up and downregulated genes that enriched molecular functions related voltage-gated ion channel activity, as well as ATPase-coupled intramembrane lipid transporter activity. Interestingly, the neocortex displayed the greatest and strongest significant induction of gene expression including previously described immediate early genes and transcription factors. These results provide a detailed databank of genes altered in many regions of the brain acquired from the same animal and reveal interesting findings about the differences the brain responds to sleep loss.
